<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE article>
<article
  xmlns="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook" version="5.0"
  xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" >
  <info>
    <title></title>
  </info>
<section xml:id="significance-of-color">
  <title>Significance of color</title>
  <orderedlist numeration="arabic" spacing="compact">
    <listitem>
      <para>
        Light blue backgrounds have user actionable items in them.
      </para>
    </listitem>
    <listitem>
      <para>
        Light gray backgrounds are informational.
      </para>
    </listitem>
    <listitem>
      <para>
        Green backgrounds for Subject files in the Analysis screens
        indicate that access to any Object file is Allowed (A).
      </para>
    </listitem>
    <listitem>
      <para>
        Pink backgrounds for Subject files in the Analysis screens
        indicate that the Subject has access only to a defined set of
        Object files.
      </para>
    </listitem>
    <listitem>
      <para>
        Green backgrounds for Object files in the Analysis screens
        indicate that the file can be accessed using any open mode.
      </para>
    </listitem>
    <listitem>
      <para>
        Green backgrounds indicate a successful artifact deployment in
        the deployment popups.
      </para>
    </listitem>
    <listitem>
      <para>
        Pink backgrounds for Object files in the Analysis screens
        indicate that the file can be accessed using only a set of
        defined open modes (e.g. only for Read (R)).
      </para>
    </listitem>
    <listitem>
      <para>
        Yellow backgrounds indicate that a changed artifact is ready for
        deployment in the deployment popups.
      </para>
    </listitem>
    <listitem>
      <para>
        Red backgrounds in the Analysis screens indicate that access to
        those Subject or Object files is denied.
      </para>
    </listitem>
    <listitem>
      <para>
        Red backgrounds indicate a failed artifact deployment in the
        deployment popups.
      </para>
    </listitem>
    <listitem>
      <para>
        Green backgrounds in the Trust Database Management screens
        indicate that the file size and/or hash match the file size
        and/or hash of the file on the file system.
      </para>
    </listitem>
    <listitem>
      <para>
        Red backgrounds in the Trust Database Management screens
        indicate that the file size and/or hash does not match the file
        size and/or hash of the file on the file system.
      </para>
    </listitem>
    <listitem>
      <para>
        Bold red text indicates that file trust needs to be reconciled
        and the text itself, indicates which trust database (ST or AT)
        the reconciliation needs to take place in.
      </para>
    </listitem>
  </orderedlist>
</section>
</article>
